Update DID Method Specification (#972)
iotaledger/identity.rs: documentation/docs/specs/did/iota_did_method_spec.md

# IOTA DID Method Specification

Draft 11 August 2022

## Abstract

The IOTA DID Method Specification describes a method of implementing the [Decentralized Identifiers](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/) (DID) standard on [IOTA](https://iota.org), a Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT). It conforms to the [DID specification v1.0](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/) and describes how to perform Create, Read, Update and Delete (CRUD) operations for IOTA DID Documents using unspent transaction outputs ([UTXO](https://wiki.iota.org/IOTA-2.0-Research-Specifications/5.1UTXO)) on the IOTA and [Shimmer](https://shimmer.network/) networks, introduced with the [Stardust upgrade](https://blog.shimmer.network/stardust-upgrade-in-a-nutshell/).

## Introduction

### UTXO Ledger

The unspent transaction output ([UTXO](https://wiki.iota.org/IOTA-2.0-Research-Specifications/5.1UTXO)) model defines a ledger state where outputs are created by a transaction consuming outputs of previous transactions as inputs. IOTA and Shimmer have several output types, the relevant ones for the IOTA DID Method are: Basic Outputs for value transactions, and Alias Outputs.

> All outputs must hold a minimum amount of coins to be stored on the ledger. For output types that can hold arbitrary data, for instance the Alias Output, the amount of coins held by the output must cover the byte cost of the data stored. This helps control the ledger size from growing uncontrollably while guaranteeing the data is stored on the ledger indefinitely, which is important for resolving DID Documents. This deposit is fully refundable and can be reclaimed when the output is destroyed.

Reviewer: Wow, that's really weird. But sure, then let's match TIP-18.

## Introduction

### The IOTA Tangle

This specification defines a method of implementing DID on top of the [IOTA Tangle](https://iota.org), which is a Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) using a Tangle data structure. In contrast to a Blockchain, the Tangle does not store messages in blocks and chain them together, but rather creates a data structure where a message references between one and eight previous messages (used to be two, as the gif shows), creating a parallel structure.

Blockchain | Tangle
:---------:|:---------:

![Blockchain bottleneck](/img/blockchain-bottleneck.gif) | ![Tangle Bottleneck](/img/tangle-bottleneck.gif)

## UTXO and Stardust

The unspent transaction output ([UTXO](https://wiki.iota.org/IOTA-2.0-Research-Specifications/5.1UTXO)) model defines a ledger state where outputs are created by a transaction consuming outputs of previous transactions as inputs. Stardust introduced multiple output types including Basic Output for value transactions, NFT Output for storing NFTs on layer 1, and Alias Output mainly designed for smart contract support.

> All types of outputs must hold a minimum amount of IOTA coins in order to be stored on the ledger. For some output types that can hold data, for instance the Alias Output, the amount of IOTA coins held by the output must cover the byte cost of the data stored. This helps to control the ledger size from growing uncontrollably while guaranteeing the data is indefinitely stored on the ledger which is important for resolving DID Documents.
> This deposit is fully refundable and can be reclaimed when the output is destroyed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All outputs must hold a minimum amount of coins to be stored on the ledger. For output types that can hold arbitrary data, for instance the Alias Output, the amount of coins held by the output must cover the byte cost of the data stored. This helps control the ledger size from growing uncontrollably while guaranteeing the data is stored on the ledger indefinitely, which is important for resolving DID Documents. This deposit is fully refundable and can be reclaimed when the output is destroyed.
```

Data saved in an output and covered by byte cost deposit will be saved in *all* nodes of the shimmer network and can be accessed by any node in the network.

![Outputs](/img/utxo.png)

**todo outdated image**

### Alias Output

The [Alias Output](https://github.com/lzpap/tips/blob/master/tips/TIP-0018/tip-0018.md#alias-output) is a specific implementation of the UTXO state machine. It includes specific properties including:

* **Amount**: the amount of IOTA coins held by the output.

> * **Alias ID**: 32 Byte Array, a unique identifier of the alias, which is the BLAKE2b-256 hash

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Alias ID**: 32 byte array, a unique identifier of the alias, which is the BLAKE2b-256 hash
```

  of the Output ID that created it.
* **State Index**: A counter that must increase by 1 every time the alias is state transitioned.
* **State Metadata**: Metadata that can only be changed by the state controller. A leading uint16 denotes its length.
* **Unlock Conditions**:
    * State Controller Address Unlock Condition
    * Governor Address Unlock Condition

Consuming an Alias Output in a transaction means that the alias is transformed into the next state. The current state is defined as the consumed alias output, while the next state is defined as the **alias output with the same explicit `AliasID` on the output side**. There are two types of transitions: `state transition` and `governance transition`.

> All outputs include an `Unlock Conditions` property. This feature defines how the output can be unlocked and spent. For the Alias Output there's two types of controllers that can be set as Unlock Conditions, state and governor controllers. Each of these controllers can be either an Ed25519 Address, Alias Address or an NFT Address. An Alias Output can have at most one of each controller.

Reviewer 2: This is frequent: it's just "governor".

```suggestion
All outputs include an `Unlock Conditions` property. This feature defines how the output can be unlocked and spent. The Alias Output supports two types of controllers that can be set as unlock conditions: the state controller and governor. Each of these can be either an Ed25519 Address, Alias Address or an NFT Address. An Alias Output can have at most one of each unlock condition.
```

> The state controller is responsible for a state transition. It is identified by an incremented `State Index` and can change the fields `IOTA Amount`, `State Index`, `State Metadata` among other properties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The state controller is responsible for a state transition. It is identified by an incremented `State Index` and can change the fields `Amount`, `State Index`, `State Metadata` among other properties.
```

> The governor controller, on the other hand, is responsible for a governance transition indicated by an unchanged `State Index`. A governance transition can change the Addresses of state and governor controllers. It also allows a transition to an empty state resulting in destroying the Alias Output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The governor, on the other hand, is responsible for a governance transition indicated by an unchanged `State Index`. A governance transition can change the addresses of the state controller and governor. It also allows destroying the Alias Output by consuming it.
```

```
did:iota:iota:0xe4edef97da1257e83cbeb49159cfdd2da6ac971ac447f233f8439cf29376ebfe
did:iota:0xe4edef97da1257e83cbeb49159cfdd2da6ac971ac447f233f8439cf29376ebfe
```

### IOTA-Tag
An IOTA-tag is a hex-encoded `Alias ID`. The `Alias ID` itself is a unique identifier of the alias, which is the BLAKE2b-256 hash of the Output ID that created it.
This tag identifies the Alias Output where the DID Document is stored, and it will not be known before the generation of the DID since it will be assigned when the Alias Output is created.

### Anatomy of the State Metadata

In the `State Metadata` of the Alias Output must be a byte packed payload with header fields as follows:

| Name          | Type         | Description                                                        |
|---------------|--------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Document Type | ByteArray[3] | Set to value **DID** to denote a DID Document.                     |
| Version       | uint8        | Set value **1** to denote the version number of this method        |
| Encoding      | uint8        | Set to value to **0** to denote JSON encoding without compression. |

> | Payload       | ByteArray    | Payload encoded according to `Encoding`.                           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Payload       | ByteArray    | A DID document where every occurrence of the DID from the document's `id` field is replaced by `did:0:0`. It must be encoded according to `Encoding`.                           |
```

Author: the payload is explained under the table, it has the document and the metadata too.

Reviewer: Yeah, I'm aware, but I primarily wanted everything in one place, so the important information of having replace the `did:0:0` isn't almost hidden under the table in a different place.

| Name      | Description                                     |
|-----------|-------------------------------------------------|

> | ByteArray | A dynamically sized, but unprefixed byte array. |

Author: I think you mean TIP 21.

#### Payload

The payload must contain the following fields:

* `metadata`: contains metadata about the DID document. For example, `created` to indicate the time of
  creation, and `updated` to indicate the time of the last update to the document. It can also include other properties.
* `document`: which contains the DID document. In the example below, the document only contains one verification method. The `id` is specified by `did:0:0` which references the DID of the document itself, since the `id` is unknown at the time of publishing. It also duplicates the DID of the document to reduce the size of the state metadata, in turn reducing the required storage deposit.

Example State Metadata Document:

```Json
{
   "document":{
      "id":"did:0:0",
      "verificationMethod":[
         {
            "id":"did:0:0#key-1",
            "controller":"did:0:0",
            "type":"Ed25519VerificationKey2018",
            "publicKeyMultibase":"z6BNtMbKY78XDVuqfh4u15bZkByu94XNVr9RpqEGCNncn"
         }
      ]
   },
   "metadata":{
      "created":"2022-08-02T21:39:48Z",
      "updated":"2022-08-02T21:39:48Z"
   }
}
```

> In a state metadata document, every occurrence of the DID must be replaced by `did:0:0`.

Reviewer: Actually, let's state this in the table, as suggested in another comment, and remove this so it's all in one place.

```suggestion
```

### Create
In order to create a simple self controlled DID two things are required:
1. An Ed25519 Address of which the private key is available.
2. A Basic, Alias or NFT Output with enough coins to cover the byte cost.

Creation steps:
1. Create the content of the DID Document like verification methods, services, etc.
2. Create the payload and the headers as described in the [Anatomy of the State Metadata](#anatomy-of-the-state-metadata).
3. Create a new Alias Output with the payload and the headers stored in its `State Metadata`.
4. Set the state controller and the governor unlock conditions to the addresses that should control state and governance transitions, respectively.
5. Set enough coins in the output to cover the byte cost.
6. Publish a new transaction with an existing output that contains at least the storage deposit from step 6 as input, and the newly created Alias Output as output. 

Once the transaction is confirmed, the DID is published and can be formatted by using the `Alias ID` as the tag in [DID Format](#did-format).

### Read

The following steps can be used to read the latest DID document associated with a DID.

> 1. Obtain the `Alias ID` from the DID by extracting the `iota-tag` from the DID, see [DID Format](#did-format).
> 2. Query the Alias Output corresponding to the `Alias ID`, using a node running the [inx indexer](https://github.com/iotaledger/inx-indexer). Nodes usually include this indexer by default.

Reviewer: Step 5 might seem odd, but since I would suggest to no longer derive the final DID from the alias id of the output, as stated elsewhere, we should at least do this basic check.

```suggestion
1. Obtain the `Alias ID` from the DID by extracting the `iota-tag` from the DID, see [DID Format](#did-format).
2. Obtain the network of the DID by extracting the `iota-network` from the DID, see [DID Format](#did-format).
3. Query the Alias Output corresponding to the `Alias ID` using a node running the [inx indexer](https://github.com/iotaledger/inx-indexer). Nodes usually include this indexer by default.
4. Assert that the extracted network matches the one returned from the node. Return an error otherwise.
5. Assert that the `Alias ID` of the returned output matches the `Alias ID` extracted from the DID. Return an error otherwise.
```

Reviewer 2: > Query the Alias Output corresponding to the `Alias ID` using a node running the [inx indexer]

> Assert that the extracted network matches the one returned from the node. Return an error otherwise.

We should probably state which REST APIs to call?

3. Retrieve the value of the `State Metadata` field from the returned output.
4. Check if its content matches the [Anatomy of the State Metadata](#anatomy-of-the-state-metadata). Return an error otherwise.
5. Decode the DID document from the state metadata.

> 6. Replace the placeholder `did:0:0` with the actual DID which can be derived from the `Alias ID` of the output.

Reviewer: We don't actually have to derive it from the Alias ID, but can just use the one given as input. That avoids us having to explain how to get the BECH32 HRP/network name. Since we just resolved the DID on the network extracted from the initial DID and ensured it matches in one of the earlier steps, it's fine.

```suggestion
6. Replace the placeholder `did:0:0` with the DID given as input.
```

### Update

Updating a DID Document can be achieved by a state transition of the Alias Output. A state controller can update the
`State Metadata` in the Alias Output which reflects an update to the DID Document.

1. Create the content of the updated DID Document.
2. Create the payload and the headers as described in the [Anatomy of the State Metadata](#anatomy-of-the-state-metadata).
3. Create a new Alias Output with the same `Alias ID` as the current output.
4. Increment the `State Index`.

> 5. Leave the unlock conditions unchanged.

Reviewer: That was my suggestion, but it's actually incorrect. It's perfectly fine to update the unlock conditions during a DID update. Again, I would love to just leave this point out because this is not our concern, it's the concern of output validation, i.e. TIP-18. No matter if we write this, or "Set state controller and governor" like in _Deactivation_, we're stating incorrectly what is actually allowed. Technically, the user can do whatever is valid according to TIP-18.

The correct way would be to say something like "Set valid unlock conditions." at which point we're not saying anything helpful and might as well leave it out.

As discussed, it's fine to leave it as-is for now and address it later, but we should address it at some point.

Author: Why is this incorrect? state transition doesn't allow changing controllers.

Reviewer: True that. Sorry I got confused on that part :man_shrugging:.

3. Retrieve the value of `State Metadata` from the returned output.
4. Check if its content matches the [Anatomy of the State Metadata](#anatomy-of-the-state-metadata).
5. Retrieve the value of `document` from the payload.
6. Replace the placeholder `did:0:0` with the actual DID.

### Update

Updating a DID Document can be achieved by a state transition of the Alias Output. A state controller can update the
`State Metadata` in the Alias Output which reflects in updating the DID Document.

1. Create the content of the updated DID Document.
2. Use placeholder `did:0:0` instead of the actual DID in the document.
3. Create the payload and the headers as described in the [Anatomy of the State Metadata](#anatomy-of-the-state-metadata).
4. Create a new Alias Output with the same `Alias ID` as the current output.
5. Increment the `State Index`.
6. Set the state controller and the governor.
7. Publish a new transaction with the current Alias Output as input and the newly created one as output.

Note, if the updated document requires more coins to cover the storage deposit, another input will be required to cover that.

### Delete

#### Deactivate

> Temporarily deactivating a DID can be done by deleting the content of the `State Meadata` in the Alias Output. This will render the DID unresolvable.

Reviewer: It can still be resolved, but it will yield a deactivated document.

```suggestion
Temporarily deactivating a DID can be done by deleting the content of the `State Meadata` in the Alias Output.
```

> 1. Create and new Alias Output with the same `Alias ID` as the current output with empty `State Metadata`.

Reviewer: "Create new" could be read as an output different from the current one, which is not accurate.

```suggestion
1. Set the Alias Output's `State Metadata` field to an empty byte array.
```

### IOTA-Network

**TODO should be replaced by shimmer? **

The iota-network is an identifier of the network where the DID is stored. This network must be an IOTA Ledger, but can either be a public or private network, permissionless or permissioned.

The following values are reserved and cannot reference other networks:

1. `main` references the main network which refers to the Tangle known to host the IOTA cryptocurrency.
2. `dev` references the development network known as "devnet" maintained by the IOTA Foundation.

When no IOTA network is specified, it is assumed that the DID is located on the `main` network. This means that the following DIDs will resolve to the same DID Document:

```
did:iota:main:0xe4edef97da1257e83cbeb49159cfdd2da6ac971ac447f233f8439cf29376ebfe
did:iota:0xe4edef97da1257e83cbeb49159cfdd2da6ac971ac447f233f8439cf29376ebfe
```

> ### IOTA-Tag

Reviewer 3: We need to come up with a different term. The did spec calls it "method specific-identifier". Other suggestions:
`identifier`
`iota-id`

Reviewer 2: We use `tag` in the framework though. The `method-specific-identifier` includes the `network` (e.g. `main:0x123`, `dev:0x123`, `rms:0x123`, etc.), so tag distinguishes "just the end bit"?

Reviewer 3: Good point, since there is no obvious replacement, let's leave it as is.

| Payload       | ByteArray            | Byte-packed playload.                                        |

#### Payload
The payload must contain the following fields:

* `metadata`: contains metadata about the DID document for example, `created` to indicate the time of
  creation, and `updated` to indicated the time of the last update to the document. It can also include other properties.
* `document`: which contains the actual data of the document. In the example below, this document only contains one verification method. The `id` is specified by `did:0:0` referencing the same document since the `id` is unknown at the time of publishing.

```Json
{
   "document":{
      "id":"did:0:0",
      "verificationMethod":[
         {
            "id":"did:0:0#key-1",
            "controller":"did:0:0",
            "type":"Ed25519VerificationKey2018",
            "publicKeyMultibase":"z6BNtMbKY78XDVuqfh4u15bZkByu94XNVr9RpqEGCNncn"
         }
      ]
   },
   "metadata":{
      "created":"2022-08-02T21:39:48Z",
      "updated":"2022-08-02T21:39:48Z"
   }
}
```

Note that `did:0:0` is a placeholder of the actual DID.

## Controllers

> A state controller can directly update the DID Document and the amount of coins held by the Alias Output, but it cannot destroy the output. A governor, on the other hand, can indirectly update the DID Document by updating the state controller. It can also destroy the output by performing a governance transition without producing an Alias Output with the same `Alias ID`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A state controller can directly update the DID Document and the amount of coins held by the Alias Output, but it cannot destroy the output. A governor, on the other hand, can indirectly update the DID Document by updating the state controller. They can also destroy the output by performing a governance transition without producing an Alias Output with the same `Alias ID`.
```

Author: The state controller can't destroy the Alias Output AFAIK. Only the governor can.

Reviewer 3: You are absolutely right, this was meant as an attempt at more inclusive speech. Maybe we just go for `The governor can ...`.

As of now, only one state controller and one governor can be set for an Alias Output. Support for multiple controllers may be possible depending on future updates of the protocol.

## CRUD Operations

Create, Read, Update and Delete (CRUD) operations that change the DID Documents are to be submitted to an IOTA Tangle in order to be publicly available. They have to update or destroy the Alias Output including the DID document.

> **These operation require fund transfer to cover storage deposit. Transactions must be carefully done in order to avoid fund loss**

Reviewer 3: Elaborate on "carefully done"

### IOTA-Network

> **TODO should be replaced by shimmer? **

Reviewer 2: This should now be the network Bech32-HRP. E.g. "iota", "atoi", "smr", "rms".

The iota-network is an identifier of the network where the DID is stored. This network must be an IOTA Tangle, but can either be a public or private network, permissionless or permissioned.

The following values are reserved and cannot reference other networks:

1. `main` references the main network which refers to the Tangle known to host the IOTA cryptocurrency.
2. `dev` references the development network known as "devnet" maintained by the IOTA Foundation.

When no IOTA network is specified, it is assumed that the DID is located on the `main` network. This means that the following DIDs will resolve to the same DID Document:

```
did:iota:main:0xe4edef97da1257e83cbeb49159cfdd2da6ac971ac447f233f8439cf29376ebfe
did:iota:0xe4edef97da1257e83cbeb49159cfdd2da6ac971ac447f233f8439cf29376ebfe
```

### IOTA-Tag

The IOTA tag references an `Alias ID` identitfying the Alias Output where the DID Document is stored.
The tag will not be known before the generation of the DID. It will be assigned when the Alias Output is created.

> ### Anatomy of serialized document

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Anatomy of the State Metadata
```

> In the `Metadata` of the Alias Output must be a JSON document containing two properties:

Reviewer 2: This is incorrect, it's a byte-packed struct with header fields, like the DID Message. It's also `stateMetadata`, not `metadata`, which is a separate feature.

`DID<VERSION><ENCODING><PAYLOAD>`

This should conveyed by a Markdown table similar to the output specifications, e.g. https://hackmd.io/SULTqAt5Q7yQwWTghJtZCw#DID-Output

* `metadata`: contains metadata about the DID document for example, `created` to indicate the time of
  creation, and `updated` to indicated the time of the last update to the document. It can also include other properties.
* `document`: which contains the actual data of the document. In the example below, this document only contains
  one verification method. The `id` is specified by `did:0:0` referencing the same document since the `id` is unknown
  at the time of publishing.

```Json
{
   "document":{
      "id":"did:0:0",
      "verificationMethod":[
         {
            "id":"did:0:0#key-1",
            "controller":"did:0:0",
            "type":"Ed25519VerificationKey2018",
            "publicKeyMultibase":"z6BNtMbKY78XDVuqfh4u15bZkByu94XNVr9RpqEGCNncn"
         }
      ]
   },
   "metadata":{
      "created":"2022-08-02T21:39:48Z",
      "updated":"2022-08-02T21:39:48Z"
   }
}

```

## Controllers

> As of now, only one state and one governance controller can be set for an Alias Output. Multiple controller support can be done by future updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of now, only one state controller and one governor can be set for an Alias Output. Support for multiple controllers may be possible depending on future updates of the protocol.
```

> A state controller can directly update the DID Document and the amount of IOTA coins held by the Output, but it can't destroy the output. A governor controller, one the other hand, can indirectly update the DID Document by updating the state controller. It also can destroy the output by having a governance transition to the empty state.

Reviewer 2: Place this above the previous paragraph. Avoid saying "empty state" for destruction, it can cause confusion because that is how we deactivate DID Documents now, by publishing an empty `stateMetadata`.

```suggestion
A state controller can directly update the DID Document and the amount of coins held by the Alias Output, but it cannot destroy the output. A governor controller, one the other hand, can indirectly update the DID Document by updating the state controller. It can also destroy the output by performing a governance transition to the empty state.
```

> ## CRUD Operations

Reviewer 2: All these operations really need numbered steps, an implementer should be able to replicate the DID Method exactly by following them.

Create, Read, Update and Delete (CRUD) operations that change the DID Documents are to be submitted to an IOTA Tangle in order to be publicly available.
They have to update or destroy the Alias Output including the DID document.

### Create

Creating a new DID is done by creating a new Alias Output containing a serialized document as described in [Anatomy of serialized document](#anatomy-of-serialized-document). This requires the fulfillment of all the
Stardust requirements including the byte cost.

> ### Read

Reviewer 2: This needs to detail how to obtain the Alias Id from a DID, unpack the state metadata and, for instance, replace the placeholder `did:0:0` with the actual DID.

In order to read the latest DID document associated with a DID, the Alias Output of containing the DID Document
must be queried using the `Alias ID`. This can be done using an [inx indexer](https://github.com/iotaledger/inx-indexer)
which normal nodes usually include by default.

> ### Updating DID Document

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Update
```

Updating can be achieved by a state transition of the Alias Output. A state controller can update the
`State Metadata` in the Alias Output which reflects in updating the DID Document.

> ### Delete

Reviewer 2: Have two subsections under this section: `Deactivate` and `Destroy`.

| Name          | Type         | Description                                                                                                                                              |
|---------------|--------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Document Type | ByteArray[3] | Set to value **DID** to denote a DID Document.                                                                                                           |
| Version       | uint8        | Set value **1** to denote the version number of this method                                                                                              |
| Encoding      | uint8        | Set to value to **0** to denote JSON encoding without compression.                                                                                       |
| Payload       | ByteArray    | A DID document and its metadata, where every occurrence of the DID in the document is replaced by `did:0:0`. It must be encoded according to `Encoding`. |

> Next to [TIP-21](https://github.com/Wollac/protocol-rfcs/blob/serialization/tips/TIP-0021/tip-0021.md), we use the following type definitions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next to [TIP-21](#data-types--subschema-notation), we use the following type definitions:
```

### Revocation

Revocation of Verifiable Credentials and signatures is currently achieved through revoking public keys in the IOTA Identity framework. Alternatively, developers should consider using the [`credentialStatus` property](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/#status) when issuing and revoking Verifiable Credentials at scale.
Revocation of Verifiable Credentials and signatures can be achieved using the [Revocation Bitmap 2022](../revocation_bitmap_2022.md) where issuers store a bitmap of indices in the DID Document. These indices correspond to verifiable credentials they have issued. If the binary value of the index in the bitmap is 1 (one), the verifiable credential is revoked, if it is 0 (zero) it is not revoked.

### Standardized Services

The IOTA Identity framework also standardized certain `services` that are embedded in the DID Document. It is RECOMMENDED to implement these when implementing the `did:iota` method.

Currently standardized `services`:

* Nothing yet.

## Security Considerations

> The `did:iota` method is implemented on the [IOTA Tangle](https://iota.org), a public permissionless and feeless Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT), making it resistant against almost all censorship attack vectors. Up until the `Coordicide` update for the IOTA network, a reliability on the coordinator exists for resolving ordering conflicts. This has a minor censorship possibility, that, in the worst case, can prevent ordering conflicts from resolving to a DID. However, these can only be published by the owner of the private key and therefore does not constitute a usable attack vector. Lastly, a node may decide to censor DID messages locally, however a user can easily use another node. 

Reviewer 2: We can still mention the public, permissionless and censorship aspects here. And that individual nodes could potentially censor DIDs but again, any other node could be used.

> Since DID messages are always to be signed and the 'chain of custody' of the signing key can be traced throughout the identity lifespan, replay, message insertion, deletion, modification and man-in-the-middle attacks are prevented.

Reviewer 2: We really need a section on what aspects we are protected against by using the ledger. Notably how it deals with conflicts, replays, man-in-the-middle-attacks etc. The state index also provides a good linear history, if one has it.

We are not transparently cryptographically verifiable to clients anymore though (we rely on the protocol), so we might want to consider whether it's worth including some sort of signature on the DID Document payload as well.

> All private keys or seeds used for the `did:iota` method should be equally well protected by the users. The signing key is especially important as it controls how keys are added or removed, providing full control over the identity. The IOTA Identity framework utilizes the [Stronghold project](https://github.com/iotaledger/stronghold.rs), a secure software implementation isolating digital secrets from exposure to hacks or leaks. Developers may choose to add other ways to manage the private keys in a different manner.

Reviewer 2: Remove all references to "signing key". We should refer to the keys for the state controller and governor now.

All private keys or seeds used for the `did:iota` method should be equally well protected by the users. The signing key is especially important as it controls how keys are added or removed, providing full control over the identity. The IOTA Identity framework utilizes the [Stronghold project](https://github.com/iotaledger/stronghold.rs), a secure software implementation isolating digital secrets from exposure to hacks or leaks. Developers may choose to add other ways to manage the private keys in a different manner.

## Privacy Considerations

### Personal Identifiable Information

The public IOTA Tangle networks are immutable networks. This means that once something is uploaded, it can never be completely removed. That directly conflicts with certain privacy laws such as GDPR, which have a 'right-to-be-forgotten' for Personal Identifiable Information (PII). As such, users should NEVER upload any PII to the Tangle, including inside DID Documents. The IOTA Identity framework allows Verifiable Credentials to be published to the Tangle directly, however this feature should only be utilized by Identity for Organisation and Identity for Things. 

### Correlation Risks

> As with any DID method, identities can be linked if they are used too often and their usage somehow becomes public. IOTA provides a simple solution for this problem: as creating identities is completely feeless, it is recommended to make new identities on a per interaction basis (Pairwise DIDs). The IOTA Identity framework will provide support for this in the future. 

Reviewer 2: We should still mention such risks, they are even greater now since it can correlate your identity with your wallet.

> The public IOTA Tangle networks are immutable networks. This means that once something is uploaded, it can never be completely removed. That directly conflicts with certain privacy laws such as GDPR, which have a 'right-to-be-forgotten' for Personal Identifiable Information (PII). As such, users should NEVER upload any PII to the Tangle, including inside DID Documents. The IOTA Identity framework allows Verifiable Credentials to be published to the Tangle directly, however this feature should only be utilized by Identity for Organisation and Identity for Things.

Reviewer 2: This needs to be expanded a bit to mention how destroying an Alias Output does remove it from the current state of the ledger, but it may still be stored by permanodes or other parties recording historical ledger states.

The following steps can be used to read the latest DID document associated with a DID.
1. Obtain the `Alias ID` from the DID by extracting the `iota-tag` from the DID, see [DID Format](#did-format).
2. Obtain the network of the DID by extracting the `iota-network` from the DID, see [DID Format](#did-format).
3. Query the Alias Output corresponding to the `Alias ID` using a node running the [inx indexer](https://github.com/iotaledger/inx-indexer). Nodes usually include this indexer by default.
4. Assert that the extracted network matches the one returned from the node. Return an error otherwise.
5. Assert that the `Alias ID` of the returned output matches the `Alias ID` extracted from the DID. Return an error otherwise.

> 7. Retrieve the value of the `State Metadata` field from the returned output.

Reviewer: Numbering.

Currently standardized `services`:

* Nothing yet.

## Security Considerations
The `did:iota` method is implemented on the [IOTA](https://iota.org), a public permissionless and feeless Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT), making it resistant against almost all censorship attack vectors. Up until the `Coordicide` update for the IOTA network, a reliability on the coordinator exists for resolving ordering conflicts. This has a minor censorship possibility, that, in the wrost case, can prevent transactions from getting confirmed.

### Private Key Management

All private keys or seeds used for the `did:iota` method should be equally well protected by the users. Private keys of the state controller and the governor are especially important as they control how keys are added or removed, providing full control over the identity. The IOTA Identity framework utilizes the [Stronghold project](https://github.com/iotaledger/stronghold.rs), a secure software implementation isolating digital secrets from exposure to hacks or leaks. Developers may choose to add other ways to manage the private keys in a different manner.

## Privacy Considerations

### Personal Identifiable Information

> The public IOTA Tangle networks are immutable networks. This means that once something is uploaded, it can never be completely removed. For example, destroying an Alias Output will remove it from the ledger state, but it can still be stored in permanodes or by any party that records historical ledger states.

Reviewer: Nit: Wording,

```suggestion
The public IOTA Tangle networks are immutable networks. This means that once something is included, it can never be completely removed. For example, destroying an Alias Output will remove it from the ledger state, but it can still be stored in permanodes or by any party that records historical ledger states.
```

> That directly conflicts with certain privacy laws such as GDPR, which have a 'right-to-be-forgotten' for Personal Identifiable Information (PII). As such, users should NEVER upload any PII to the Tangle, including inside DID Documents. The IOTA Identity framework allows Verifiable Credentials to be published to the Tangle directly, however this feature should only be utilized by Identity for Organisation and Identity for Things.

Reviewer: > The IOTA Identity framework allows Verifiable Credentials to be published to the Tangle directly

Not yet? Does that refer to Public VCs?

```suggestion
That directly conflicts with certain privacy laws such as GDPR, which have a 'right-to-be-forgotten' for Personal Identifiable Information (PII). As such, users should NEVER upload any PII to the Tangle, including inside DID Documents. The IOTA Identity framework allows Verifiable Credentials to be published to the Tangle directly, however this feature should only be utilized by Identity for Organisations and Identity for Things.
```

### Correlation Risks

> As with any DID method, identities can be linked if they are used too often and their usage somehow becomes public. Additionally, a DID can be correlated with funds if the Alias Output used to store the DID Document or any of its controllers is used for holding, transferring or controlling coins or NFTs. 

Reviewer: > As with any DID method, identities can be linked if they are used too often and their usage somehow becomes public. 

I know you didn't write this, but this should be clarified. Currently, it's barely understandable what it's supposed to mean, and how one is supposed to use a DID to avoid or mitigate this problem.

Reviewer 2: It should link out to the W3C specification section, which has some advice on how to mitigate it: https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-correlation-risks

Author: Thanks Criag, that was my idea too.
